Expression recipe and some simple tests (#390)
kysely-org/kysely: site/docs/recipes/expressions.md

# Expressions

> An [`Expression<T>`](https://kysely-org.github.io/kysely/interfaces/Expression.html) is the basic type-safe query building block in Kysely. Pretty much all methods accepts expressions as inputs. Most internal classes like [SelectQueryBuilder](https://kysely-org.github.io/kysely/classes/SelectQueryBuilder.html) and [RawBuilder](https://kysely-org.github.io/kysely/classes/RawBuilder.html) (the return value of the [sql tag](https://kysely-org.github.io/kysely/functions/sql-1.html)) are expressions themselves.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An [`Expression<T>`](https://kysely-org.github.io/kysely/interfaces/Expression.html) is the basic type-safe query building block in Kysely. Pretty much all methods accept expressions as inputs. Most internal classes like [SelectQueryBuilder](https://kysely-org.github.io/kysely/classes/SelectQueryBuilder.html) and [RawBuilder](https://kysely-org.github.io/kysely/classes/RawBuilder.html) (the return value of the [sql tag](https://kysely-org.github.io/kysely/functions/sql-1.html)) are expressions themselves.
```

> `Expression<T>` represents an arbitrary SQL expression like a binary expression `a + b` or a function call `func(arg1, arg2, ...)` or it can be any combination of those no matter how complex. `T` is the output type of the expression.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Expression<T>` represents an arbitrary SQL expression, like a binary expression (e.g. `a + b`), or a function call (e.g. `concat(arg1, ' ', arg2, ...)`). It can be any combination of those, no matter how complex. `T` is the output type of the expression.
```

## Expression builder

> Expressions are usually built using an instance of [ExpressionBuilder<DB, TB>](https://kysely-org.github.io/kysely/classes/ExpressionBuilder.html). `DB` is the same database type you give to `Kysely` when you create an instance. `TB` is the union of all tables that are visible in the context. For example `ExpressionBuilder<DB, 'person' | 'pet'>` means you can access `person` and `pet` tables and all their columns in the expressions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Expressions are usually built using an instance of [ExpressionBuilder<DB, TB>](https://kysely-org.github.io/kysely/classes/ExpressionBuilder.html). `DB` is the same database type you give to `Kysely` when you create an instance. `TB` is the union of all table names that are visible in the context. For example `ExpressionBuilder<DB, 'person' | 'pet'>` means you can access `person` and `pet` tables and all their columns in the expression.
```

  ])
  // You can also destructure the expression builder like this
  .where(({ and, or, cmpr, not, exists, selectFrom }) => or([
    and([
      cmpr('first_name', '=', firstName),
      cmpr('last_name', '=', lastName)
    ]),
    not(exists(
      selectFrom('pet')
        .select('pet.id')
        .whereRef('pet.owner_id', '=', 'person.id')
        .where('pet.species', 'in', ['dog', 'cat'])
    ))
  ]))
  .executeTakeFirstOrThrow()

console.log(person.upper_first_name)
console.log(person.pet_name)
console.log(person.is_jennifer)
```

The generated SQL:

```sql
select
  upper("first_name") as "upper_first_name",

  (
    select "name"
    from "pet"
    where "pet"."owner_id" = "person"."id"
    limit 1
  ) as "pet_name",

  "first_name" = $1 as "is_jennifer"
from 
  "person"
where (
  (
    "first_name" = $2
    and "last_name" = $3
  )
  or not exists (
    select "pet.id"
    from "pet"
    where "pet"."owner_id" = "person"."id"
    and "pet"."species" in ($4, $5)
  )
)
```

In the above query we used the expression builder in `select` and `where` methods. You can use it the same way in other methods like `having`, `on`, `orderBy`, `groupBy` etc.

> All expressions are composable. You can pass expressions as arguments of any expression. All query builder methods in Kysely accept expressions and expression builder callbacks. All expression builder methods offer autocompletions and type-safety just like methods on the query builders.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All expressions are composable. You can pass expressions as arguments of any expression. All query builder methods in Kysely accept expressions and expression builder callbacks. All expression builder methods offer auto-completions and type-safety just like methods on the query builders.
```

> You might be wondering why you need to use a callback to get the expression builder? Why not just create an instance using a global function? The reason is that when you use a callback, kysely is able to infer the context correctly and the expression builder methods only autocomplete and accept columns and tables that are available in the context. In other words using a callback provides more type-safety.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You might be wondering, "why do I need to use a callback to get the expression builder?". "Why not just create an instance using a global function?". The reason is that when you use a callback, Kysely is able to infer the context correctly. The expression builder's methods only auto-complete and accept column and table names that are available in the context. In other words, using a callback provides more type-safety!
```

Author: Much better 💯

There's also a global function `expressionBuilder` you can use to create expression builders:

```ts
import { expressionBuilder } from 'kysely'

// `eb1` has type `ExpressionBuilder<DB, 'person'>`
const eb1 = expressionBuilder<DB, 'person'>()

// In this one you'd have access to tables `person` and `pet` and all their columns.
const eb2 = expressionBuilder<DB, 'person' | 'pet'>()

let qb = query
  .selectFrom('person')
  .innerJoin('movie as m', 'm.director_id', 'person.id')

> // You can also provide a query builder instance and the types are inferred automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// You can also provide a query builder instance and the context is inferred automatically.
```

// Type of `eb` is `ExpressionBuilder<DB & { m: Movie }, 'person' | 'm'>`
const eb = expressionBuilder(qb)

qb = qb.where(eb.not(eb.exists(
  eb.selectFrom('pet')
    .select('pet.id')
    .whereRef('pet.name', '=', 'm.name')
)))
```

## Creating reusable helpers

> The expression builder can be used to create reusable helper functions. Let's say we have a complex `where` expression we want to reuse in multiple queries:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The expression builder can be used to create reusable helper functions. 
Let's say we have a complex `where` expression we want to reuse in multiple queries:
```

```ts
function hasDogNamed(name: string): Expression<boolean> {
  const eb = expressionBuilder<DB, 'person'>()

  return eb.exists(
    eb.selectFrom('pet')
      .select('pet.id')
      .whereRef('pet.owner_id', '=', 'person.id')
      .where('pet.species', '=', 'dog')
      .where('pet.name', '=', name)
  )
}
```

> This helper can now be used in any query that has the `person` table joined:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This helper can now be used in any query, and would work just fine if "person" table is in context:
```

```ts
const doggoPersons = await db

>   .selectFrom('person')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  .selectFrom('person') // <-- "person" is indeed in context
```

  .selectAll('person')

>   .where(hasDogNamed('Doggo'))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  .where(hasDogNamed('Doggo')) // <-- this is the helper we implemented earlier
```

  .execute()
```

> The above helper is not very type-safe. The fillowing code would compile, but fail at runtime:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above helper is not very type-safe. The following code would compile, but fail at runtime:
```

```ts
const bigFatFailure = await db

>   .selectFrom('movie')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  .selectFrom('movie') // <-- "person" table is not in context!
```

  .selectAll('movie')

>   .where(hasDogNamed('Doggo'))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  .where(hasDogNamed('Doggo')) // <-- but we're refering to "person.id" in our helper..
```

  .execute()
```

We can write a more type-safe version of the helper like this:

```ts

> function hasDogNamed(name: string){

Reviewer: ```suggestion
function hasDogNamed(name: string) {
```

  return (eb: ExpressionBuilder<DB, 'person'>) => {
    return eb.exists(
      eb.selectFrom('pet')
        .select('pet.id')
        .whereRef('pet.owner_id', '=', 'person.id')
        .where('pet.species', '=', 'dog')
        .where('pet.name', '=', name)
    )
  }
}
```

> With this helper, you get a type error when trying to use it in a context where the `person` table isn't joined to the query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this helper, you get a type error when trying to use it in contexts that don't include the "person" table.
```

## Conditional expressions

> In the following, we'll only cover `where` expressions. The same logic applies `having`, `on`, `orderBy`, `groupBy` etc. but not to `select`. If you want to add conditional selections, see [this recipe](https://www.kysely.dev/docs/recipes/conditional-selects).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following, we'll only cover `where` expressions. The same logic applies to `having`, `on`, `orderBy`, `groupBy` etc. 

> This section should not be confused with conditional selections in `select` clauses, which is a whole 'nother topic we discuss in [this recipe](https://www.kysely.dev/docs/recipes/conditional-selects).
```

> The most basic and common case for adding conditional `where` expressions is having a set of optional filters you want to combine using `and`. Since the `where`, `having` and other filter functions are additive, most of the time this is enough:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having a set of optional filters you want to combine using `and`, is the most basic and common use case of conditional `where` expressions.
Since the `where`, `having` and other filter functions are additive, most of the time this is enough:
```

```ts
let query = db
  .selectFrom('person')
  .selectAll('person')

if (firstName) {
  // The query builder is immutable. Remember to replace the builder
  // with the new one.
  query = query.where('first_name', '=', firstName)
}

if (lastName) {
  query = query.where('last_name', '=', lastName)
}

const persons = await query.execute()
```

The same query can be built using the expression builder like this:

```ts
const persons = await db
  .selectFrom('person')
  .selectAll('person')
  .where(({ cmpr, and }) => {
    const filters: Expression<boolean>[] = []

    if (firstName) {
      filters.push(cmpr('first_name', '=', firstName))
    }

    if (lastName) {
      filters.push(cmpr('last_name', '=', lastName))
    }
    
    return and(filters)
  })
```

> Using the latter design, you can build expressions of any complexity using conditions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the latter design, you can build conditional expressions of any complexity.
```
